Question 1 
(20 Marks)
Consider the following relations in a database created for a taxi service
Vehicle (vehiclelD : char(4), type 
: varchar(10), fielType: varchar(6), mileage: real)
Driver (driverID : char(4), name 
: varchar(50), phone 
: char(10))
Customer (customerID 
: char(4), name: varchar(5), phone :char(10))
Booking (bookingID: 
int, 
vehicleID: 
char(4), driverID: char(4), customerID: 
char(4), 
date: 
datetime, from 
: varchar(15), to: varchar(15), distance: real)
Payment (bookingID: int, fee: real)
The database stores information on vehicles owned by the service in the Vehicle table. The table stores a
unique vehicle ID (vehicleID), type (‘Hatchback’, ‘Sedan’ or ‘Van’), firel type (‘Petrol’ or ‘Diesel’) and the
total distance the vehicle have travelled so far (mileage) for each vehicle owned by the service. Information
of drivers working at the taxi service is stored in the Driver table. The table stores a unique ID (driverID), 
name and the phone number of each driver working at the service. For each customer, the service stores a
customer ID (customerID) in the Customer table in the database along with the name of the customer and
his/her phone number. When a customer books a taxi, the service assigns a unique ID (bookingID) for the
booking, 
and stores the booking ID along with the ID of the driver assigned (driverID), ID of vehicle
assigned (vehicleID), customer ID of the customer (customerID), booked date (date), from where the 
customer is taking the taxi from (from) and the destination the customer want to reach (o) in the Booking
table. Once the customer has completed the journey, the distance of the journey is updated in kilometers in
the Booking table. Payment table stores the booking ID and the payment to be made for each booking.
Use SQL queries to answer following questions.
i. Find the names of the customers who has booked the vehicle number V001’ to reach 
‘Maharagama’ 
(2 marks)
ii. For each driver who had driven a ‘Sedan’ for a total distance exceeding 5000km display
the name of the driver and the total distance he had driven. 
(4 marks)
iii.Find the ID and type of all vehicles which have been only booked for travelling more
than 100 kilometers between 1% January 2016 and 315 December 2016. 
(3 marks)
b) 
The charging scheme for the taxis booked with the taxi service is as follows: Initial charge for
the taxi is Rs. 300 and the customer can travel for Skms without an additional payment. For
each km travelled after the first Skm, a payment of Rs.50 per kilometer would be charged.
Create a stored procedure to calculate the payment due for a booking, given the distance the
customer has travelled and the booking ID, and store the payment amount to be made along
with the booking ID in the Payment table. 
(5 marks)
¢) 
Create a trigger to update the mileage of the vehicle assigned and add a record to the payment
table (use the stored procedure created in part b)), assuming that the Booking table is only
updated when the distance is assigned at the completion of a booking. 
(6 marks)
Page2of 7