00340
Question 1 
(20 marks)
Consider the following schema of a database developed for an airport.
Customer (customerld: integer, name: varchar (30), age: int, phone: char (10))
Reservations (flno: char (6), custld: integer)
Flights (flno: char (6), from: varchar (30), to: varchar (30), departs: datetime,
arrives: datetime, regNo: char (8), pilotld: integer)
Aircraft (regNo: char (8), model: varchar (15), capacity: integer,
Pilots (id: integer, name: varchar (30), salary: float, flyingHours: integer)
The Aircraft table stores the registration number (regNo), model (mode!) and the number
of passengers who can travel in the aircraft (capacity) for each aircraft type. The Flights
table stores the flight number (flno), the departing airport (from), destination airport (to),
departing time (departs), arrival time (arrives), the registration number of the aircraft
(regNo) and the id of the pilot (pilot) related to all flights. Reservations table stores the
flight number (flno) and the customer number (custld) for each customer who has reserved
a flight. Pilots table stores the id (id), name (name), salary (salary) and the number of hours
the pilot have flown (flyingHours) for each pilot. Primary keys of the tables are underlined.
a) 
Use SQL queries to answer following questions.
i. 
 Find the registration number and the model of alrcraﬂs that departs to ‘Brisbane’ 
between 1% January 2010 and 31t May 2010. 
(2 marks)
ii. 
 For each aircraft that has a capacity over 200 display the registration number and
the number of flights it has taken. If the aircraft has not taken any flights display 
0 for the number of flights. 
(3 marks)
iii. 
 For each pilot who has flown an aircraft more than 100 times and has the number
of flying hours exceeding 5000, print the pilots name and the salary 
(4 marks)
b) 
Create a function which outputs the number of seats available in a given flight.
Hint: If the number of reservations in a flight is equal to its capacity there are no seats
available in the flight 
(5 marks)
c) 
Create a trigger that uses the function you have created in part b) 
i0 ensure that the 
number of passengers in a flight does not exceed the capacity of the air craft.
(6 marks)
Page 
2 of 7 
29/03/2016