Question 1 
(20 marks)
Consider the following schema of 
a database developed for a university.
Lecturer (lecturerld: integer, Iname: varchar (30), grade: varchar (20), salary: real,
type: varchar (10), department: varchar (30)) 
Qualifications (lecturerld: integer, qualification: varchar (30)) 
Course (cid: integer, cname; varchar (25), credits: integer, program: varchar (30)) 
Teach (lecturerld: integer, cid: integer, year: integer, semester: integer)
Lecturer table stores the id (lecturerld), name (Iname), grade ( ‘Assistant Lecturer’, ‘Lecturer’ 
or ‘Senior Lecturer’), salary, type of the lecturer (‘Permanent’ or ‘Visiting’) and the attached 
department (such as ‘IT” and ‘IS’) for each lecturer in the university. Qualifications table
stores information related to the qualifications of lecturers. The table stores the IDs of the
lecturers (lecturerld) and the qualifications they have received (such as ‘BSc in IT”, ‘MSc in
GIS’, ‘MBA’ and ‘Phd in Computer Science’). Course table stores the ID of the course (cid), 
name (cname), number of credits (credits) and the program the course belongs to (such as ‘BSc
in IT”, and ‘BEng in Mechanical Engineering’) for each course offered. The Teach table stores 
information on teaching. For each lecturer teaching a course, the Teach table stores the ID of
the lecturer (lecturerld), ID of the course he/she has taught (cid), the year and the semester 
he/she has taught the course. Lecturerld attribute in Qualifications and Teach tables are foreign 
keys that references the Lecturer table. Cid attribute in Teach table is a foreign key that 
references the Course table. All primary keys of the tables are underlined.
a) Use SQL queries to answer following questions.
i. 
 Find the names of the courses in the ‘MBA” program which are taught by the lecturers
attached to the ‘IT” department. 
(3 marks)
ii. 
 Find the names of the courses that are not offered in semester 2 0of 2016. (3 marks)
iii. 
Find the names and the IDs of the lecturers who teach a course for the same
qualification he has obtained.
Hint: When a student completes a program he obtains that qualification 
(4 marks)
b) Create a function that calculates and returns the workload for a given lecturer in a given
year and a semester. Workload indicate the number of hours'a teacher teach weekly. 
Assume that a teacher spend 2 hours weekly in teaching every course he teach (5 marks)
¢) Suppose that the university pays 5000 rupees for visiting lecturers for one hour of lectures. 
With the assumption that a lecturer teach 20 hours in each course he teach in one semester,
write a procedure that calculate the payment to be made for all visiting lecturers for a given 
year and a semester and store it in the salary column. 
(5 marks)
30/09/2016 
Page 
2 of 7