

--- PAGE 2 ---
Question 1 
(20 marks)
Consider the following EER Model.
a) 
Convert the following EER model in to the relational model. Indicate the primary keys and the
(16 marks)
foreign keys of the resulted relations clearly.
b) 
What is the best option for mapping the ISA hierarchy in the diagram? Justify your answer.
(4 marks)
[DIAGRAM: page_002_diagram_1.png]

--- PAGE 3 ---
Question 2 
(15 marks)
Consider a relation R (A, B, C, D, E, F, G) with the following set of functional dependencies over
R:
F = {A->BC, B->D, C->EF, AC->G}
a) 
Find all the keys in relation R using attribute closure method. 
(4 marks)
b) 
Is R in 3NF? Give reasons for your conclusion. 
(3 marks)
¢) 
IsRin BCNF? Give reasons for your conclusion. If R is not in BCNF, convert it to a set of BCNF
relations. 
(8 marks)
Question 3 
(25 marks)
a) 
“Native API Driver is faster than Java Thin Driver”. Accept or refute the above statement
justifying your answer. 
(2 marks)
b) 
There are several different statements in the JDBC API to retrieve the result set based on different
requirements. Which type of statements is used in the code segment given below? Briefly explain 
when this type of statements will be used. 
(2 marks)
[DIAGRAM: page_003_diagram_1.png]
c) 
Briefly explain what is meant by a ‘Full Backup’? 
(2 marks)
d) 
Briefly explain the three main aspects to focus on when a database is secured? 
(3 marks)
e) 
A software company has been assigned the responsibility of automating the tasks of a digital 
marketing company.
This includes designing and developing a database for the company to maintain the records of 
various functions. It also maintains records of digital channels to market products and services
in order to reach consumers.
Menaka, a senior DBA is assigned to the project to handle all the administrative tasks related to
the databases by the database architect. Menaka creates the required database and assign Nipun

--- PAGE 4 ---
the responsibility of managing the CompanyDB. Since there will be lot of users for the project, 
Amali is assigned with the responsibility of handling logins to the system.
Nipun assigns Kasuni with the responsibility of creating tables. In addition, Kasuni should be
able to create views, stored procedures and triggers required. Dinethi, who is data entry operator
is given 
the responsibility 
of inserting the data 
to 
the table. Amal 
is assigned with the 
responsibility of generating reports from the table in the data. For the above purpose, Amal could 
directly query the data or call functions and procedures.
i. 
 Write a T-SQL statement to create a login to Menaka 
(2 marks)
ii. 
 Provide permission using fixed server role to handle all the administrative tasks in the
server to Menaka. 
(3 marks)
iii. 
Assuming that Nipun has the user name nipun.b, write a T-SQL statements required to
assign him with the responsibility of handling the companyDB using user defined server
role. 
(5 marks)
iv. 
Assuming that Kasuni has a login name by the name kasuni.a write T-SQL statements
required to allow her to create tables, functions, procedures and triggers. 
(3 marks)
v. 
Assuming that Amal has a login name amal 
k. write T-SQL statements required to perform
the tasks she is responsible for. 
(3 marks)
Question 4 
(40 Marks)
Consider the following schema of a database designed for a university:
Students (studentld: int, name: varchar(40), email: varchar(30), dob: date, specialization 
: int, 
GPA: real)
Courses (courseld: int, name: varchar(40), credits: int)
Offer (specialization: int, courseld: int, acYear: int, semester: int)
Grades (studentld: int, courseld: int, acYear: int, calYear: int, semester: int, status: varchar
(10), CAMarks:int, finalMark: int, grade: char(1))
GradePoints (grade: char(1), gradePoint: real)
Enrollment (studentld: int, courseld: int, calYear: int, semester: int, basis: varchar (30))
Students table stores information about each student, including their ID (studentId), name, email,
date of birth (dob), specialization and GPA. The Courses table stores information about each course 
offered by the university, including the course ID (courseld) name, and credits. The offer table stores 
information on courses offered in a semester including the specialization, course 1D (courseld), 
academic year (acYear) such as year] & year2 and semester the course is offered. The grades table
stores the grades of the students including their IDs (studentld), course ID (courseld), academic year 
(acYear) such as year 
1 and year2 
, calendar year(calYear) such as 2021 & 2022 and semester the
course was offered, status of the course (‘Pass’, ‘Fail’, ‘IC’-incomplete), continuous assessment

--- PAGE 5 ---
marks (CAMarks), final exam marks (finalMarks) and grade the student has obtained (‘A’,’B’ & *C”). 
GradePoints table stores the grades and their associated grade points (e.g. A —4.0., C- 2.0 
& etc). 
Enrollment table stores the information on student enrollment for courses including student ID 
(studentld), course 1D (courseld), calendar year(calYear) and the semester the student enrolled for
the course and the basis on which the student enrolled (‘Regular’, ‘Repeat’ and ‘Prorata’). Primary 
keys of the tables are underlined.
a) 
Write SQL Queries to perform the following:
i. 
Display the course id, name, and credits of courses offered in semester 
1 
in year 2023 for 
students following ‘Data Science’ Specialization. 
(4 marks)
ii. 
Find the course IDs and names of modules offered in year 2 semester 
1 to more than one
specializations. 
(6 marks)
iii. 
Find the ID, name, specialization and gpa of students in the Dean's list for year 2022 
semester 2. Note that a student is in a Dean's List if for a particular semester in a year he has 
completed all modules and has an overall GPA over 3.7. 
(7 marks)
b) 
Create a function to calculate the GPA of a given student for a given semester and year.
(11 marks)
GPA= Y grade point of a grade obtained for a module x credit point for the module
. credit points of modules taken
¢) 
Create a trigger to set the grade of basis pro-rata or repeat students to ‘C” if he/she passes the 
module 
(12 marks)
Assume that CA marks and Final Marks are given by 100 and a student passes the module if the 
overall mark is above 45. 
Overall Mark = (CA + Final Marks)/2