00048
Question 1 
(20 Marks)
The Computer Science Students at SLIIT are planning to design a database to produce music 
albums. The students have come up with the following requirements.
The students who have talent in music (i.e. singing, playing an instrument, etc..) are named as
‘student musician’. 
 All student musicians are capable of singing songs. In addition, some of
them play instruments and some of them act as producers when albums are produced. For each
student musician a unique identification number, name and address are recorded. For those who
play instruments, their specialization, and the duration that they play should be stored. For each
instrument, a unique identification number and the name (e.g., guitar, violin, flute, etc.) are
recorded. Each student capable of playing instruments may play several instruments, and a
given instrument is played by one student. A student who plays instruments may supervise
several other such students.
Each album has a unique identification number, title, copyright date and a format (e.g., CD or 
MC). Each album has one student who acts as its producer. A student may produce several 
albums. Each album has several songs on it and a song appears on one album. The date that the 
songs are recorded on the album should be known.
For each song a unique identification number, the title and the author are recorded. Each song
is sung by one or more students, and a student sings several songs. The number of times that a
song is sung should be recorded. Each song may have several melody types. For each melody
type, the tempo, and the key for that song (e.g. C major, D minor etc.) are recorded. Different
songs may have the same key.
a) 
What are the entities that could be used for the above requirements? 
(3 Marks)
b) 
Identify suitable attributes and the primary key, if any, for each of the entities that you
have identified. 
(3 Marks)
¢) 
s there a recursive relationship? Justify your answer. 
(2 Marks) 
—
d) 
Is there any weak entity type? Justify your answer. 
(2 Marks)
¢) 
Identify a likely superclass/subclass relationship. Justify your answer. 
(2 Marks)
f)” Construct a suitable EER diagram for the above given requirements. State any 
assumptions you make. Note: You may avoid showing the attributes on the entity
types, but any attributes on the relationships must be shown. 
(8 Marks)
Page 2 of 6