Question 4 
(40 marks)
Consider the following relations in a Movie Database.
Movie (mID: int, title: varchar(30), year: date, rank: real) 
Actor (alD: int, fname: varchar(30), Iname: varchar(30), gender: char(10)) 
Director (dID: int, fname: varchar(30), Iname: varchar(30), gender: char(10)) 
Casts (actorID: int, movielD: int, role: varchar(10)) 
Genre (genlD: int, type: varchar(10)) 
DirectsMovie (directorID: int, movielD: int) 
MovieGenre (movielD: int, genlD: int) 
Reviewer (reviewlD: int, reviewName: varchar(20)) 
Rating (movielD: int, reviewID: int, reviewStars: int)
The attributes of the Movie relation are id (mID), title, year it was made and the rank of the movies. 
The Actor relation has attributes to record the id (aID), first name (fname), last name (/name) and 
gender (‘M or ‘F’) of actors. The Director relation has attributes to store the id (d/D), first name 
(fname), last name(/name) and gender (‘M’ or ‘F’) of directors. The Casts relation associates the 
movie with actors who had acted in them and contains the role (‘lead’. ‘support’, or ‘other’) they 
played. The Genre relation stores information of movies types (such as ‘Romantic’, “Horror’,
‘Action’, ‘Fiction’, ‘Documentary’, ‘Thriller’, and ‘Drama’). The DirectsMovie relation stores 
information on movies and their directors. The MovieGenre relation stores information related to 
movies respective genre. A Rating system is carried out based on the Reviewers’ number of stars. 
The Reviewer relation has attributes to record the reviewer id, name. The Rating relation has
attributes to store the movie id, reviewer id and reviewer’s number of stars. Primary keys are 
underlined
a) Use SQL queries to answer following questions.
i. 
 Display names of all the Actors in the movie “The Princess Bride”. (5 marks)
ii. 
 Display all directors who directed 500 movies or more, in descending order of 
the number of movies they directed. List the directors' names and the number 
of movies each of them directed. 
(6 marks)
b) Create a view named movieDirection that contains movie title, movie genre type, year,
director’s first name, last name and actors for those movies. 
(8 marks)
c) Create a function named as getActorCount, which takes movie title as the input and
returns the number of actors that acted in that particular movie.
k? 
(9 marks)
d) Assume that rank of the Movie are based on the number of stars the reviewers have 
rewarded. Write a trigger to update the rank when the reviewer places stars in a new movie.
(12 marks)
Page 4 of 
4
25/09/2019