Question 1 
(20 marks)
Consider the following relations in a bank database:
Branch (bName:char(15), city:varchar(12), phone:varchar(10)) 
Customer (custno:integer, cName:char(15), gender:char(1), birthday:date) 
Account (accno:integer, branchname:char(15), acctype:char(1), balance:real)
AC (accno:integer, custno:integer)
The attributes of the Branch relation are name of the branch (bName), city, and phone.
The Customer relation has attributes to record the customer number (custno), name
(cName), gender (‘M’ or ‘F”), and birthdate of customers. The Account relations consists
of account number (accno), branch name (branchname), account type (acctype) which 
may be individual (acctype=‘T’) or joint (acctype=‘J’), and account balance (balance).
The 
attribute branchname 
in Account 
is 
a foreign key 
that references 
Branch; 
an
individual account belongs to a single customer, while a joint account is held by two or
more customers. The attribute accro and custno in AC reference the relations Account
and Customer respectively. The primary keys of all relations are underlined.
a) 'Express the following queries in SQL.
i. 
For each customer with 
a total balance exceeding 50000LKR for 
all his/her 
accounts together, display the customer number and total balance.
(3 marks)
ii. For each branch, display the branch name, account number and balance of each 
account that has a balance greater than twice the average balance of all accounts at
that branch. 
In the resulting report, order the accounts of each branch 
in the 
descending sequence of account balance.
(5 marks)
b) 
It is required to record the number of account holders for each account by adding an 
attribute named holders. The value of this attribute will be 
1 for individual accounts 
and greater than 
1 for joint accounts.
i. 
In the Account table, add a new attribute named holders of integer type with a 
default value of 1.
(1 marks)
ii. Write a T-SQL procedure to update the holders attribute (that has just been added)
only for joint accounts.
(5 marks)
iii. Write a trigger to decrease the holders attribute value when a row is deleted from
the table AC only if it is for a joint account. If the updated value of holders is one
for the joint account, then change the acctype to ‘I’.
(6 marks)
Page 1 of 5