00846
Question 1 
(20 marks)
Consider a database schema consisting of the following relations for recording
information on the clients of a stock broking firm:
Clients (cIno, name, phone) 
Stocks (scode, sname, price, dividend, eps) 
BuySell (clno. trdate, trtype, scode, qty, price) 
StocksOwned (clno, scode, totalgty, totalcost, currval)
A tuple in the Clients table consists of 
a unique client number, name and phone number.
Each tuple of Stocks table contains unique stock code, stock name, the current price of 
a
share, dividend per share, and earning per share (eps). Each transaction of a client which 
may be a buy or a sell of a stock is recorded a tuple in the BuySell table. It contains the
client number, transaction date and time, type of transaction (B for buy or S for sell),
stock code, number of shares (qty) and price per share for the transaction. The 
StocksOwned table contains a tuple for each stock a client currently owns, along with the
total quantity of the stock, the total cost of purchasing the stock, and its current value. 
The primary key of each table is underlined.
a) Express the following queries in SQL.
i. Find the name and price of each stock that is owned by five or more clients. 
(4 marks)
ii. Find the name and phone number of clients who have not bought any stock since 
1* January 2014. 
(5 marks)
b) Write T-SQL procedure named insertasell to insert a row into the BuySell table for a
sell transaction given the input parameters of client number, stock code, and quantity. 
The transaction date and time should be the current date and time; the price is the 
current price of the stock in the Stocks table. 
(5 marks)
c) Assume that a procedure named updstockowned is already available to update the 
StocksOwned table. It takes clients number, stock code, quantity, price, and 
transaction type as a parameters. When the transaction type is ‘B, the procedure 
increase the total quantity and cost of the given stock for the client (or inserts a new 
row for client and stock if that client did not own the previously).
Write a trigger named buytrigger on the BuySell table that will update the 
StocksOwned table by calling this procedure, whenever a new row of a Buy 
transaction is inserted into the BuySell table. [Only write the trigger, don’t write the 
updstockowned procedure] 
(6 marks)
Page 1 of 6
08/04/2015