

--- PAGE 2 ---
/ 
/
Question 1 
(20 marks)
Convert the following EER model in to the relational model. Indicate the primary keys and the
foreign keys of the resulted relations clearly.
[DIAGRAM: page_002_diagram_1.png]
Page 2 of 4

--- PAGE 3 ---
J
/) 
/
Question 2 
(15 marks)
Consider a relation R (A, B, C, D, E, F) with the following set of functional dependencies over R:
F={A 
> BEF,B> E,C > D,AC > B}
a) 
Find all the keys that follow from the given FDs using attribute closure, showing how you
obtained them. 
(6 marks)
b) 
IsRin 3NF? Give reasons for your conclusion. 
(3 marks)
c) 
Is R in BCNF? Give reasons for your conclusion. If R 
is not in BCNF, convert it to a set of 
BCNF relations. 
(6 marks)
Question3 
(25 marks)
Consider the database of a printing company, which prints books according to the requests of authors
with the following schema:
[DIAGRAM: page_003_diagram_1.png]
Book table stores the book ID, title, publisher of each book and the year the book 
is published. Author table
stores the author ID, first name and last name of all authors. WrittenBy table stores the author ID of the author,
book ID of the book and the position of the author (such as first author, second author) for each book written.
Publisher table stores the name of the publisher and country and the city the book 
is published.
Write relational algebra statements to answer the following queries
a) 
Display the titles of the books printed in 2019. 
" 
(2 marks)
b) 
Display the titles of the books published in New York city. 
(4 marks)
c) 
Display the name of the publisher who published both ‘Fundamentals 
of Database systems’ and
Database Applications’ in America. 
' 
(5 marks)
d) 
Display the first name and last name of authors who are only first authors. 
(5 marks)
e) 
Display-the titles of books with most number of authors. 
(9 marks)
Page 3 of 4

--- PAGE 4 ---
Question 4 
(40 Marks)
Consider the following relations in a database created for a university.
Module (mCode: char(6) 
, mName: varchar (50), credits: int, specialization 
: char(4), year: int, semester: int)
Student (sld: char(10), sName: varchar(50), age: int, gpa: int, address: varchar(50))
Follow (sld: char(10), mCode: char(6), semester: int, academicYear: int, grade: char(1))
Class (cld: int, mCode: char(6), sld: Char(10), type: varchar(10), day: char(3), time:time, len: int, hld: char(4))
Hall (hld: char(4), building: varchar(15), floorNo: int, capacity: int)
Module relation stores the code (mCode), name (mName), number of credits (credits) and the specialization
the module belongs to (such as ‘IT”, ‘SE’, ‘CSN’), year and the semester the module is offered for each module
offered. Student relation stores the ID (s/d), name(sName), age, cumulative gpa (gpa) and address of all
students. For each student following a module in the university the Follow relation 
stores the ID of the student
(sId), code of the module (mCode), the semester the module is offered (such as 
| and 2), the academic year
the student has followed the module (such as 2018 and 2019) and the grade he received for the module. The
Class relation stores the id(c/d) , code(mCode) , type of the class (such as ‘lecture’ and ‘tutorial’), day the class
is conducted such as (‘Mon’, ‘Tue’, ‘Wed’), start time of the class (time), length of the class in hours (/en) and
the id of the hall the class is conducted (h/d) for each Class. Hall relation stores the ID (h/d), name of the
building the hall is in, floor number the; hall is in (floorNo) and capacity of each Hall.
a) 
Use SQL queries to answer following questions.
i. 
Display the module codes and name of all modules followed by students 
in year 3 of ‘SE’
specialization in academic year 2018. 
(5 marks)
ii. 
Display the hall id and the floor number of halls which are vacant on Monday in Engineering
Building. 
(6 marks)
b) 
Create a view named ClassDetails that contains class id, module name, year the module is offered,
specialization, type of class and the size of the class for each class. (size of the class is the number of
students following the class). 
(8 marks)
¢) 
Create a function which named-getAvialability which takes class id and 
module code as inputs and
returns the number of more studefits that could be added to the class based on class size and the
capacity of the h’all. 
(9 marks)
d) 
Create a trigger to ensure that for a class, students are not allocated than the capacity of the hall
allocated for the class. 
(Hint: Use the function created in c)). 
(12 marks)
Page 4 of 4